---
title: "Wordly Nonsense"
date: 2019-03-26 4:05:00
---

I have the kind of brain that, upon extensive exposure to a word, turns it into
wordly nonsense. This happened to me just now, and it was so distracting that I had
to stop programming and write about it.

## Watcher

I'm writing a reproducible watcher client, meaning a client that will be useful
for watching for changes in webby places in a research context. Of course, this
means that I've seen the word "watcher" so many times that my brain is playing
games on me. Has this ever happened to you? A word that you don't think twice
about starts to turn into nonsense. There are stages to this process.


### Round 1: The Dirty Mind

The combination of letters "watcher" starts to look really strange. My brain
starts to say "Hey, watcher kind of looks like snatcher if you turned the w
on its side and wiggled it around a bit." Is this someone that snatches the last 
cookie when nobody is looking? Is it the noun version of snatch, which I'm pretty
sure is a dirty word. Oh gosh, at this point I'm focused on if a snatch is a dirty thing,
or some kind of snack. Does a snatcher snatch snacks?

### Round 2: What IS it

The next brain warping focuses on meaning. Come on now, really, what <strong>is</strong> a watcher? 
Is it someone that is doing the action of watching? Is it an older man sitting
at a dock waiting for a boat, creases framing his eyes, looking quietly at the horizon?
Is it a slangy way of saying "What's 'er"? Is it a sheek new brand of water made by
Cher, "WatCHer", or someone with a thick accent saying "water?" 
This round of thinking goes on indefinitely, and it's this kind of thinking that 
leads to prowess with puns. The only problem is that by the time I'm done playing
with sounds, the word  looks completely foreigh and weird and I need space from
it in order to regain back the original meaning.

### Round 3: The Fantasy 

At some point the visual brain takes over. What in the heck <strong>is</strong> watching? 
Is it like (the watch on my wrist) watching? 

> Could you have by a drive by watching? 

My brain then creates detailed visual fantasty of a red car moving by
(in slow motion) and hundreds of black watches flying out the window. An 
unsuspecting vicim, walking in the street, senses a disturbance and turns to his
left, screams in slow motion terror, throws his hands up to guard his face, and
then is pummelled (also in slow motion) with all the watches. He slowly falls 
out of the scene.

> He was watched.

Yes, he was! 

## Snack for Thought

The brain is an amazing lump of meat. It's interesting that 
creativity seems to come from both actively thinking (the examples above) and
[not thinking about things](https://www.reddit.com/r/Showerthoughts/). For most,
repeated exposure probably leads to better retention and learning, but for me it
leads to intense and excessive focus on details that don't matter. This is the
question that I'll leave you with today - how do you learn along this gradient of 
exposure? Are the different kinds of learning good for different things?
And now I've gotten it out of my system, and I can go back to programming. I
hope that you aren't watched today!
