---
title: "The Mystery of PS4"
date: 2018-01-05 12:41:00
---

The little set of `$PS*` variables that are hiding on standard linux machines are one of those hidden nuggets of awesome that, once you discover, lead to numerous kinds of fun! Give it a try on your machine, and see how each are set:


## PS1
This is the primary prompt string. The default on my machine is quite spectacular:

```bash

echo $PS1
\[\e]0;\u@\h: \w\a\]${debian_chroot:+($debian_chroot)}\[\033[01;32m\]\u@\h\[\033[00m\]:\[\033[01;34m\]\w\[\033[00m\]\$

```

and this results in the expected path to my present working directory, for example:

```

~/Documents/Dropbox/Website/vsoch.github.io/vsoch.github.io.new$

```

Now we can try changing it, and seeing what happens! All you have to do is set `PS1` in a terminal, and press enter.

```

PS1="pancakes> "
pancakes> 

```
This is one of those "my world is rocked" moments. I've always wanted pancakes in my prompt! If you export the variable in your `.bash_profile` or `.profile` or similar, you can have pancakes **all the time**.

## PS2
This is the prompt that you see when you press enter during a command (newline) but you forget a quote or something like that. The default is a little carrot, and it's easiest to just show you. First, here is the default:

```

$ echo $PS2
>

car="I once was riding in a red velvet car and>
>
>

```
and it goes away when I complete the statement with the second quote. Now, let's try changing it to something else.

```

PS2='keepgoing>'
$ car="this is a car
keepgoing>
keepgoing>
keepgoing>

```
and there you have it! You could use a motivational message, or something more appropriate...

```

car="I once was..
taco!
taco!
taco!

```

## PS3
This is what gets shown when there is a select command. Take a look at this example:

```

#!/bin/bash
# favorite-color.sh
# chmod u+x favorite-color.sh
select color in blue green orange red exit
do
  case $color in
    blue) echo "Blue!";;
    green) echo "Green!";;
    orange) echo "Orange!";;
    red) echo "Red!";;
    exit) exit;;
  esac
done

```

Let's look at the default `$PS3`, it's not set.

```

$ echo $PS3

```
When we run it without that set, we get this.

```

./favorite-color.sh 
1) blue
2) green
3) orange
4) red
5) exit
#? 1
Blue!
#? 5

```

I entered 1 and it selected blue, and I entered 5 and exit. Now let's try setting it:

```

PS3="What is your favorite color? " ./favorite-color.sh 
1) blue
2) green
3) orange
4) red
5) exit
What is your favorite color? 3
Orange!
What is your favorite color? 5

```

That's super cool! It's such an easy way of giving a prompt.

## PS4
And here is the most mysterious (at least to me). This is what gets printed before a trace, and so if you set the calling `/bin/bash` to have `-x` it's going to do this. You can look at the <a href="https://linux.die.net/man/1/bash" target="_blank">bash man pages</a> for some interesting snippets about how this works, and I have a feeling hidden in these pages is going to be the answer to this riddle, if not a good starting point for solving it. First, here is the default on my machine:

```

$ echo $PS4
+

```

and so if I use a small example script and run it:

```

#!/bin/sh -x

printenv | grep HOME
echo hello world!

```

I get the expected output, with a little `+` before the trace of each line.

```

./hello-world.sh 
+printenv
+grep HOME
HOME=/home/vanessa
+echo hello world!
hello world!

```

# Riddle Me This...
And herein lies the challenge for us to think about today! This example comes from a recent <a href="https://github.com/singularityware/singularity/pull/1189" target="_blank">pull request discussion</a>, I noticed this (bug?) that appeared to be inconsistent output between (the same!) calls:

```

./hello-world.sh 
++printenv
grep HOME
HOME=/home/vanessa
+echo hello world!
hello world!

```

We isolated it to Ubuntu and the case of using `-x`, but didn't go beyond that. Later as I was developing something else that warranted changing the prompt, I realized that this mysterious `PS4` existed, period, and that the repeated `+` character in the bug was in fact, exactly that. How do we know? If we change it to something else, it changes appropriately.

```

PS4='pancakes' ./hello-world.sh 
pancakesprintenv
pancakesgrep HOME
HOME=/home/vanessa
pancakesecho hello world!
hello world!

```
(and yes, this lovely discovery turned into this huge sidetrack of a post to talk about it, I'm ok with this. And so herein lies the puzzle, please help to solve it, because I haven't yet!

>> Why do we sometimes see a double print of `$PS4`?

I think likely it has to do with the fact that we are doing this trace and print relative to a pipe. But I don't know the answer. I'm hoping the rest of the internet (you!) can help!

## Want to learn more?
For a nice review and different fun options, <a href="https://www.cyberciti.biz/tips/howto-linux-unix-bash-shell-setup-prompt.html" target="_blank">see this post</a>, <a href="https://www.thegeekstuff.com/2008/09/bash-shell-take-control-of-ps1-ps2-ps3-ps4-and-prompt_command/" target="_blank">and this one</a>, or for how to also play with colors, 
<a href="https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/bash-shell-change-the-color-of-my-shell-prompt-under-linux-or-unix/" target="_blank">this one</a>. If you come up with some awesome settings, please share!
