---
title: "Alone"
date: 2024-03-08 10:00:00
hidden: true
---


Where am I supposed to go <br>
When all of my joy, life experience, lives in my head? <br>
I am equally blissful yet alone at the same time. <br>
Immersing in the ideas that I love, <br>
and am hungry for learning and challenge. <br>
Pushing the limits of a human potential <br>
Believing that a day is not well-lived <br>
If it is not sucked dry of every possible challenge <br>
that might come to my awareness at that time. <br>

You'll find me in front of a screen <br>
absorbed in thinking about systems and design <br>
and lost in a terminal and my own head. <br>
There is no greater place of flow and joy <br>
than disconnected from the world in that space. <br>
But you'll find me also, much later <br>
In the quiet of my room, looking around. <br>
Realizing that I am entirely alone. <br>
And the same intensity of focus and joy <br>
and desire to think about things fully, deeply <br>
Overhwelms others, and pushes them away. <br>

It is hard to consoldiate those two things <br>
and I often feel like I have to choose. <br>
To be true to my authentic self, and embark <br>
on every intellectual journey and challenge <br>
and visciously, attacking sources of knowledge, <br>
eating through information with 1000 hungers. <br>
Or to stifle that desire, for the comfort of others.<br>
so they might not leave me <br>
so they might think they understand me <br>
so they might even love me, and stay. <br>
so I might be here, right now, <br>
and not be alone. <br>

I must have made that choice. <br>
That being true to myself comes above all else. <br>
And coming with that, that I choose to be alone <br>
and live the life of a loner, a misunderstood flame <br>
lost in my head, and diminishing the needs of my heart. <br>
Or it must be the case, that finding someone else <br>
that might love this about me, is an impossible task. <br>
Either way, the outcome is the same. <br>

I must have made that choice, <br>
because here I am, in the middle of my life, <br>
In the darkness of the evening,  <br>
In the quiet space of an apartment empty of others <br>
Wanting so badly to discuss ideas, the wonders <br>
of the universe, of people, and everything in between, <br>
But the realization hits hard, and briefly, <br>
because I will soon start thinking again. <br>
But in this brief moment, I must recognize. <br>
That I am always alone. <br>

