---
title: "Spell Check with Typos"
date: 2021-05-08 8:30:00
category: rse
---

I'm a stickler for good documentation, but there's one thing I'm not great at
That thing is... spell checking! 😱️ 

The thing is, I write a lot of code and text without my glasses or contact lenses,
and thus rely on a lot of muscle memory and fuzzy words that appear correct to spell
check. This leads to a lot of embarassment in the way of spelling errors, and I've
had contributors open pull requests on my repos to say 'No, Vanessa,
repository is not spelled "respository."' I have no good response other than to say
"Well, my fingers seemed to think that was an appropriate spelling for the word! 😄️

## Typos

I saw a new project around Hacker News (or maybe it was Reddit) that would be my
savior - a Rust project called "typos" that offered to check spelling, and even
correct it in place!  The only problem was that I needed to automate running
it with CI, so for one of this weekend's projects I decided to <a href="https://github.com/crate-ci/typos/pull/267" target="_blank">add a GitHub action to do just that.</a>. And it works great! Here is the basics for
how to use it in your repository:

```yaml
name: vsoch-check-spelling

on:
  push:
    branches: [master]
  pull_request: []

jobs:
  formatting:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      - name: Check for typos
        uses: crate-ci/typos@1.0.4
        with: 
          files: ./_posts
```
 
You could also do multiple folders or files, like 

```yaml
          files: ./_posts ./docs ./README.md
```

And you can add a "_typos.toml" to the repository with settings for words to ignore.
<a href="https://github.com/vsoch/vsoch.github.io/pull/25" target="_blank">Take a look at all the typos that were caught here!</a>.
If you want to learn more about the typos project, see <a href="https://github.com/crate-ci/typos" target="_blank">crate-ci/typos</a>
or read about <a href="https://github.com/marketplace/actions/typos-action" target="_blank">the action on the GitHub marketplace</a>.

And when you are running it locally and want to preview and then write changes? It's as simple as:

```bash
# preview changes
./typos _posts

# write changes in place
typos _posts/ --write-changes
```

That's all folks! The news on the street is that spell checking is cool and
automating it even cooler! I'm very excited about this project and am looking forward
to adding this step to check spelling in many of my documentation-rich projects.
